I have this secret fantasy that an
artist can anticipate a scientific
breakthrough which even here this is
hard for me to say because I I went to
school as an engineer I worked in tech
for a long time and I'm skeptical even
right now I'm artist at the neuroscience
Research Center at UT and I hang out
with real scientists and they're like
really skeptical but I went back to art
school I quit my job some years ago and
I went back to art school and this is
where I learned that as an artist if you
research something and you run into
anything really difficult you can just
you can just imagine your way through it
okay and also your job as an artist is
to really pay attention to yourself and
sometimes those observations get
eventually explained by science so it
was with that idea it was three summers
ago and I had cobbled together this way
to take a look at brain patterns I'd
acti I'd hacked together this EEG from
parts from a toy and this was gonna be
my art figures out science idea and it
was going badly okay
the thing totally worked right I
strapped it on me and anybody that would
let me and the idea was I had thought
that there was a connection between your
brain patterns right the rhythms
proportions patterns in your mind and
how you experienced write rhythms
patterns proportions in the world like a
like a neuro version of
golden section and the problem I was
having with the EEG was it amplifies an
electrical signal right you strap this
thing on and what I realized I'm trying
to measure brain right and what i'm
getting instead is like whether you're
scrunching up your forehead or moving
your eyebrow I just didn't think I was
measuring anything real and I thought
hmm
I thought back like how I'm trying to
measure this directly and I thought how
else can I write get at this idea of
brain patterns and I thought back to my
early days of compact computer we'd get
right reverse engineer we used to get
the competitors product right bring it
in the conference room completely
disassemble it and look at all the
pieces and try to figure out how it
worked and I thought well maybe I can do
that around the brain and take a look at
you know kind of some subconscious
measurement of time right all that
little multitasking stuff right that
we're doing all their little parsing
bits of time and I thought well I'll
measure my time and right at the point
where I figured out how hard it is to
really write down your minute by minute
time I found Ben lip quits and Ben had
been measuring his time 24 hours a day
minute by minute going back to 2005 he's
he's yeah I've met him he's fabulous and
it was really exciting because the way I
had imagined time and the way he was
measuring time felt really similar so I
started making drawings and it was later
that very same summer a friend of mine
who's on the faculty at NYU he happens
to run the New York Chapter of the
quantified self he looks at me and he
goes Laurie this is really good but you
should measure something about yourself
and it's like all right okay so I I
discovered a Zeo which is yet another
headband
and it's a really accurate way to
measure sleep right and you don't have
to do anything you don't write anything
down right you just strap this thing on
you go to sleep it grabs all the data
for you and I it was really it was
really quite interesting because this
idea of all these little snippets of
time waking benzol of his waking time
and my sleeping time it was right it was
all these little patterns and snippets
and I became super super interested in
sleep all the good stuff happens when
you sleep and I started to really think
about my patterns of sleep and if
anybody uses a Zeo I ditched their
graphics and put it all in Excel and
you're looking at night after night all
the purple stuff is the fabulous
fabulous a deep sleep that's the good
stuff
and you can see partway through the
month you can start to see there's a
pattern these big orange sections are
when I'm waking up at night right on
cool but something's really stressing me
out
right I am waking up for hours at a time
and you know I really started to think
about right these patterns of data about
me and here's one that's even easier to
read so she's right you start to see her
right the patterns of her time and then
all of a sudden toward the end of the
month boom right something bad is going
on alright she's like huge amounts of
time where she's awake and I started to
look at these patterns of data and
realized I could see even more
subtleties in the data right I took my
sleep patterns and I compared them to
others and I realized you know there's
something very specific in this right
there's something rating individual to
me almost like this fingerprint and I
thought hmmm this feels very I mean this
feels very much like I'm specific this
is very specific to me and it was right
about this time I didn't want to be I
didn't want to be the only one that was
jumping into bed every night with this
thing strapped around my forehead so my
husband got a CO and he started to
measure his sleep and he always thought
oh god I sleep I sleep terror
well it turns out part of the time he
sleeps bad badly and part of the time he
sleeps amazingly well right so he swings
wildly but my sleeps pretty steady and I
thought oh there's something very
insightful here I mean it was like oh
there's like some essential I mean I
thought oh there's some essential right
idea of who we are in this so you might
think well why right what would my
patterns look like right am I really
moody right my steady are they gonna
squirt all of a sudden you think what
would what would I look like so I
grabbed all this raw data and as an
artist I started to translate it into
the feel of human time right here's an
argument right here's something really
stressful and here's right I'm eating an
ice cream sundae right the part right
the sense of and I put it all into a
show in Los Angeles and the show got
noticed I mean it got really got
reviewed and not just in the arts
section so the newspaper it got in tech
pubs it got in New Scientist and
Engadget I mean these were things and in
it and as an artist it's it's thrill I
mean it's thrilling but then you have
this moment of just panic right the end
of a show it's like what do I do now I
mean what do I do next
and I realized I'd never stopped
measuring my sleep and I thought well
maybe I should measure more right this
sleep was so easy what else is like that
I could you know I could try to live in
the future a little bit and you know I
realized right censors are gonna be like
embedded in our clothes and right stuck
on our skin there's one that just got
FDA approval that's this little tiny
thing that you swallow right I mean even
now right your phone has five sensors in
it you spend a lot of time right every
people sneaking over here watching your
phone but pretty soon your phone's gonna
watch you and you think yeah yeah no no
no what if I were you know what if
somebody really kept track of like
everywhere I went and
what I you know the nutrition of what I
really ate no no no no no no to be human
I've had people say this to be human is
to be a mystery okay one of the
neuroscientists in the lab a week ago I
explained what I'm working on and she
goes Laurie is it possible to have too
much data about yourself you know so if
that's going through your mind it's not
just you but for me I decided you know
to run straight toward the data
I got a Fitbit I measured my steps I
write I get on a Wi-Fi scale every day I
spit in a tube I got my DNA snippets I
turned on manic time on my laptop keeps
track of everything I do I open pass on
my phone everywhere I've gone I set up
an email trigger and I score how my
stomach feels and then exactly what I've
eaten and there's some more but I don't
want to sound I don't want to sound I
mean I'm you don't want to sound Medi
but I
no really I'm really no I mean if people
know me I'm like the most balanced
person but I wanted to get the date over
long periods of time and and now I have
you know years I've years of data and
thousands of data points but I'm not I
mean I'm not naive about data privacy
you know you probably looked at yourself
right you've taken a look what's public
about me online
what's knowable I mean I actually even
made a list once what are all the
different sources that the CIA came
after me what could they find but right
now you can get really upset about
tracking cookies do you own your email
what's on Facebook all your Google
search history every app you turn on
knows where you're located right you get
my sense right now is you know they
measure me know I measure me you have
data I have data fight back come to the
party um it's made me a lot more aware
but basically I think I mean seriously I
think in the end we are going to own our
own data okay so I'm measuring away I'm
adding more columns to the spreadsheet
and I think I'm gonna find causal
relationships I mean I'm think I'm gonna
start to figure this out and the truth
is a lot of self tracking data it's
boring and it's really noisy data and
you end up with a lot of numbers and
numbers are really abstract concepts to
us right particularly big numbers but we
recognize pattern intuitively we're
wired for pattern recognition and when I
started to see in the data was this
sense of something very specific write
something human something specific
something recognizable almost like this
fingerprint it's almost as though we're
creating right it's almost like a human
data portrait we're creating all this
data if only we'd stop and notice it and
I thought maybe art the language of art
art can get you to look
all these little cut blocks are symptom
data of a population of ALS patients an
ALS it's I mean Lou Gehrig's it's a
horrible disease people can barely talk
about it but in this case the metaphor
the the language the sense of it being
art can compel you in can get you to
spend time can make it approachable and
I thought well maybe pattern can be the
way we consume data almost like a
language right with an algorithm with
the model with the set of rules that
it's a language and pattern that we can
learn to read right you can start to see
this parts really stressful right or all
of a sudden right I can start to read my
pattern something's gone bad or right
start to just notice yourself but the
idea of pattern is as a with us the feel
and Sensibility from an artist starts to
be something that you're willing to look
at right now I'm working with instant
message chat data from a group of
software developers not in not in a
literal way not like infographics but
where the pattern starts to be the
experience around the data and then the
data itself to play it back to them as
pattern you know it's not a crazy idea
this languages their long-standing
languages the knotted number systems of
the Incas right they're these
navigational stick charts that are based
completely on the feel of waves and
Mayan glyphs which are all about right
how 1 glyph the aesthetics of 1 glyph
next to another and so these patterns
they're not random they're meaningful
they're us
there a way to see ourselves it's
recognizable it's familiar
I think our data patterns are the way to
see ourselves who we are Who am I what's
possible for me for me after write all
of this data measuring what I found was
the the measuring gave me a sense of
being of being acknowledged even when it
was coming from a mechanical device you
know it's funny self tracking always
gets described in this very Calvinist
right it's about health it's about
fitness and I I really think it's
something more compelling I think it's
about understanding who we are it's
about identity at this intersection of
art and science I have found intense
beauty in the patterns of how we live in
us and I think there's something here I
don't I mean I be truthful with you I
don't completely have it wrapped up but
I'm thinking that science maybe my
friends the neuroscientists in my
lifetime will start to understand why do
these data patterns resonate why does
this why does it feel like a connection
maybe it turns out that it boosts our
immune system or balances our mood or
simply gives us a bond with ourselves ok
I'm right at the end here and I want to
know if it's still going through your
mind
I don't know Laurie all that data no
it's just gonna magnify my defects it's
gonna kill the mystery but I'm hoping I
can flip your opinion about self
tracking data being something that's
kind of creepy
to something that you love and you won't
fear the phone watching you because it's
going to be the understanding of who we
are
and we won't fear it and in the end I
predict that all these data patterns
right that we're just going to run
straight toward our data thank you